# FPGA-Based Band Vocoder

This vocoder project aims to recreate the unique sound manipulation capabilities of traditional analog vocoders using the flexibility and power of FPGA technology. By processing the carrier and modulator signals through a series of bandpass filters, the vocoder blends the harmonic content of both inputs, producing the iconic vocoder effect.

### Key Features:
- Implementation of a band vocoder on FPGA.
- Real-time audio processing with low latency.
- OSC (Open Sound Control) integration for real-time control over network.
- Logarithmic filter bank design with MIDI notes defining the center frequency for each bandpass filter.

## Project Structure 📁

Inside the `examples/cpp/vocoder` directory, you'll find several key files essential to the vocoder's functionality:

- `vocoder-osc.cpp`: The main FPGA code for the vocoder running on the FPGA
- `vocoder-osc-arm.cpp`: ARM processor code for handling OSC communication and control logic.
- `generate_coefs.py`: A Python script for generating filter coefficients used in the vocoder's filter bank.
- `coefs.h`: Header file containing the filter coefficients generated by `generate_coefs.py`.

## Getting Started 🛠️

This project requires a Linux environment to leverage the networking stack for OSC communication. The build process involves compiling the vocoder with OSC control support using the SyFaLa toolchain.

### Prerequisites:
- [SyFaLa Toolchain]
- [Compatible FPGA Board]
- [Linux Environment] (for OSC communication)

### How to Compile:
To compile the project, use the following command in a Linux environment:

```bash
syfala vocoder/vocoder-osc.cpp --arm-target vocoder/vocoder-osc-arm.cpp --linux -b Z20 --ssm-volume DEFAULT
```

**Note**: Root privileges may be required to complete the compilation for the ARM target:

```bash
sudo syfala vocoder/vocoder-osc.cpp --arm-target vocoder/vocoder-osc-arm.cpp --linux -b Z20 --ssm-volume DEFAULT
```

## Why this? 🤔
We are a team of four students, music enthusiasts, and worked on this example as part of a group project for our school (IMT Atlantique).

## Team Members
- Yann Miguet
- Ulysse Lefeuvre
- Lenz Filipski: Specialized in embedded systems.
- Eliott Quéré: Signal processing enthusiast.

---

For any questions or feedback, please open an issue or contact us directly through the repository's contact links.